Testing, testing, one, two, three, four, testing, one, two, three, four.
Testing, testing, four, three, two, one, four, three, two, one, testing, testing.
Testing, one, five, six, seven, nine.
One, two, three, five.
This is March 29, I believe it is.
Correct.
over in the College of Veterinary Medicine talking to Dr. Leon Russell, professor of veterinary anatomy?
No, veterinary public health.
You go on all of them?
Yeah, yeah.
Epidemiology in the School of Real Public Health.
Professor, Faculty of Toxicology, Faculty of Food Science and Technology, and Professor, College of Medicine, Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology.
That may be a record.
To begin with, Leon, introduce yourself to the reader or listener.
Where did you grow up?
What did parents do for a living?
Where did you go to high school, then undergraduate?
In other words, tell us about, give us a biographical summary before you came to A&M to join the veterinary medicine faculty.
Okay.
I was born in Tulsa, Oklahoma.
I grew up there until I graduated from high school.
My father was a dentist.
My mother was a housewife.
After my freshman year in college, Oklahoma State,
My dad retired and moved back to Missouri.
All my family was from Missouri except me.
And he'd already made arrangements for me to transfer to the University of Missouri as a resident student.
So he planned on me going there.
So I went as a sophomore at the University of Missouri.
Graduated from there.
What year?
In 19, B.S.
1953, D.V.M.
1956.
And the College of Veterinary Medicine then was about five, six years old?
It was first class graduate in 1950.
All right.
So it was six years old when I was sixth class to graduate.
Your class, how many?
We started with 30, we ended up 25, I think 26, 25 original.
One transferred in Colorado State.
Any women?
No women.
No women?
No women in the Veterinary School at that time, completely.
All right.
Then after vet school, then what?
Then I was waiting to go to the service.
And by that time, the Secretary of Defense, Charles Wilson, decided they didn't need veterinarians in the Army.
They didn't have any more horses.
And so I applied for commission with the Army and the U.S.
Air Force.
And while I was waiting, I went to work for the USDA.
I got tired of that about after a year.
And I had an offer for, I had a chance to actually contact me for a fellowship to Tulane University.
So I went to Tulane and received my Master of Public Health there.
After that, I went to work for the USDA for a short period of time again, still kind of waiting.
And after a year of that, I'd been offered jobs at Iowa State, contact Oklahoma State, and also Texas A&M.
In January of 1959, my wife and I went to interview in Ames, Iowa, and it was a snowy period.
Shortly after that, we interviewed at Texas A&M.
It was not a snowy period, and my wife kind of influenced me.
She said, you ought to go where there's not that much snow.
So anyway, we end up here in fall 19.
Did you come down to visit College Station?
Came down to visit down here.
Actually came in August, so.
August of 60 or 59?
59, 59.
59.
Yeah.
Describe your and your wife's impression of College Station and the vet school as a result of that.
Well, it was a small town.
I think at that time there was only one or two motels, Sabre Inn and I think what the other one was, two motels.
The eating place was Hotard's Cafeteria and that's where Dr. Fred Jagie was, his department head was trying to recruit me, so he took us out to eat.
So I remember that.
And we kind of looked around town.
There was two grocery stores, Orr's and Winds and Safeway, actually three.
And it was a very small town.
The vet school was very small but very friendly.
And the campus was very small, but I think there were less than 7,000 students there at that time.
But there wasn't much here compared to nowadays.
But you had interviewed at Iowa State in the winter.
In the winter, yes.
And you came here in August.
Yes.
So it had two extremes.
During the, as far as you recall, describe the interview.
Who interviewed you and what did they chat about?
I came and Dr. Jaggi interviewed me.
Of course, he took me to Dean, Al Price.
I met Dr. John Miliff and Dr. Leland Grumbles and just, you know, they just asked what I was doing, what I wanted to do, what kind of background I had and this type of thing.
It's just a very, nothing very, I can remember its details.
And as far as you know, were you the only interviewee or were you one of a number?
I don't know.
Be truthful about it.
I met Dr. Jaggi.
They had American Veterinary Medical Association that year, July, in Kansas City.
And that's where we were living, Kansas City.
And I'd gone there and somebody said, you have a degree in public health.
And my friend said, well, the A&M's looking for somebody.
I found Dr. Jag and talked to him and he said, we need to look at you.
Come on down.
And so that's arrangement.
And I think there was one or two other people, but I never did ask and then inquire.
This is the only dollar and cents question we're going to ask.
What was the beginning salary offer?
The beginning salary was
Right at $7,000.
For 12 months?
12 months.
I took a cut to come here.
Really?
Yeah, I was making $7,200 a year from the federal government at that time.
And there were no moving expenses?
No, no moving expenses.
It was austere times.
Just describe the move for you and your life.
Okay.
Well, we were in Kansas City.
I was working for the government then, and the day we left there was snowing.
It seemed like snow had something to do with it.
It was kind of traumatic in a way because we had to go a long ways to go, and we had two children then, very young.
It was a long trip, to put it mildly.
No, I wasn't snowing that day.
I'm sorry.
That's when I, yeah, it was.
It was November.
It was snowing.
I'm thinking about when we came out of the interview.
It was snowing and it was the first part of November.
It's going to be kind of bitter.
Now, did you move the stuff yourself or did you have a commercial mover?
We had the commercial mover that time.
Okay.
Yeah.
We, when, after I got out of school and was in the government for a year, when I went to Tulane, we moved ourself.
And that was, that was a, that was a disaster.
So, we had a commercial mover, so.
And what kind of accommodations did you find here for housing?
We found a rental house on, gosh, I can't think of the name of it.
It's over near Country Club.
Near Briarcrest?
Not near Briarcrest, the one where the student museum is now.
I can't think of the name of it.
We lived on Franklin Avenue, Franklin Street, Franklin Avenue, which is the next street over from College Avenue.
The municipal golf course.
The old municipal golf course.
The old municipal golf course, just north of that.
When he came here, Dr. Jagged lined us up with a real estate agent and
And believe it or not, the people we rented from was a veterinarian.
And gosh, I'm sorry, I can't think of her name.
All right, Will, we can fill that in.
She, he, they separated.
He went to Arkansas and finally passed away.
And she'd been working for, she just retired recently from Student Association.
Olive de Lucia?
Olive de Lucia, yeah.
And we rented from them for about two years, and we bought a house on Oak Lawn, which is about, not too far from the campus, but in the general area, it's just north of campus, about four or five blocks.
We lived there until 1970.
All right, and as you compared with your experience before this, did housing seem inexpensive or what?
It's probably about the same, probably about the same as where we're in Kansas City, yes.
Right, so you began your duties officially.
Martha would know exactly how much, but I did.
Pardon?
You began your duties with the College of Veterinary Medicine, or the School of Veterinary Medicine was then, officially at what time?
November 16th, a Monday morning.
In 1959?
No, 1959.
We got here Saturday night, so.
And your title?
Was assistant professor.
Of public, veterinary public health?
Veterinary public health at that time, right.
All right.
As far as you understood at that time, what were your duties?
My duties were to teach, actually they had four courses in our department.
I was supposed to teach the last three courses.
We were going to develop a new course.
We had two food safety courses, one in milk and one in meat.
I was supposed to teach both of those.
Those were my duties to begin with.
And to develop a course in epidemiology, which there was not one in veterinary schools in the country at that time.
So I developed that and started teaching that about two years later.
summarize those courses to a non-well-informed... Well, they're both food safety courses.
At that time, all veterinarians had a background in milk safety and meat hygiene, we called it.
Milk safety was directed towards producing wholesome milk all the way from the cow to the bottle, so to speak.
And it's not the best course in the world to teach, but I kind of enjoyed it.
I actually had one textbook, the milk ordinance in cold, which is dry as, you know, as a desert.
And so, but they had to know those because the students would be asked questions.
on parts of that on their state licensing board.
So it was a matter of they had to meet a certain competency, you might say, as far as knowledge.
The meat inspection was another type of meat hygiene was similar.
We had federal regulations that had to know all about how to do that.
So it was a matter of teaching courses
that the students, when they got out, if they did anything like that, they would know the regulations, know what was required of them and how to go through it.
Along with the meat hygiene, we had an inspector with meat lab and I was, I did that.
So, but I also took students with me and they would learn from the lab.
Who were you replacing?
Who had been doing this?
No one had been doing that.
Dr. Jaggi had been doing it.
He'd been the only one.
He was the only one in the department when I came here.
So it was a new department.
He was in microbiology, and then he was acting dean for a year, and then they created this new department.
It's just been created that year, so I was the first person addition to department head.
And the students took this what year in there?
They took this their third year.
Third year.
Describe the students at that time as you saw them.
What kind of, what did you think of the A&M students?
Well, that particular time, the students were a little bit on the older side than they are now.
Quite a bit older.
But they were very dedicated.
They were very serious.
There was always a few that wouldn't do anything for us.
And in fact, I guess I was one of the first people to flunk somebody in one of those courses.
But I remember I had the meat hygiene course at 8 o'clock, three mornings a week if I remember correctly.
And this one student was never there.
He was there maybe a third of the time.
And I always wondered, what about the 8 o'clock class?
Found I never went to the 8 o'clock class.
Yet he passed that.
And he flunked my course.
And I still remember how Price called me in and said, are you sure he flunked?
I said, well, he was absent half the time.
And then I gave frequent quizzes.
Pop quiz, whatever.
He always missed those.
And we took major quizzes.
He didn't make it.
Well, he flunked out.
And he was doing poorly in other courses, too, I found out.
So that's my memory.
Very few poor students.
All right, now this was your first teaching assignment.
Right, right.
Describe some of the learning experiences you had as a new faculty member, pluses and minuses.
Pluses and minuses.
Well, that's a good question.
The students made, some of them had very low grades.
There's one person here on the faculty now that thanks me every now and then for passing him.
I gave him a D minus.
He said that's the worst grade I ever met, but he was so happy to get that D minus.
He was really pleased.
When I came here, because I was middle semester, I, Dr. Jaggi sent me over to San Antonio for three weeks to, to work with the, their milk hygiene sanitarians, go to the dairy farms, go to plants, so I got some on job training because I hadn't had that particular part.
So that was a little bit hard to come on to as far as the learning the applications of it, but what, what, trying to think what it's supposed to say here.
Well, some of your learning experiences as a teacher.
Oh, it's very difficult.
Personally, I mean first giving the exams.
Dr. Jaggi gave horrible exams.
He gave modified, true, false.
And the students would come to me and complain about them.
He taught infectious diseases.
And he'd underline modifiers, you know, like most, mostly, seldom.
And he may want, you know, mostly and it may be seldom in there, this type of thing.
And this drove the students crazy.
I've read a lot of books on taking exams.
At that time, we weren't given much as far as assistance from the main campus.
So it was a very hard learning experience to learn how to give exams.
I still remember that, so.
And how many were in this course?
In the course, we started out with 64 students in the Vets of Tukul.
And generally, by the time they got to 30 years, maybe 60, 58 or 60.
So you had the entire class?
Had the entire class, yes.
In one section?
One section, right.
There were always one section at that time.
And this was the way we normally identified a three-hour course?
Yes, yeah.
Was there also a lab?
There was what we call duty groups now.
And I said, this is only third year as far as a lecture.
They'd have the lecture, three hours, each course a three-hour course.
One in the fall, one in the spring.
The lab was part of their senior year for their clinic groups.
They had four weeks, five weeks at that time.
And one five-week group, we'd split them between the poultry diagnostic lab and the meat lab.
So I'd take them off to the meat lab and we'd do that.
Did either Dr. Jaggi or Dean Price or anyone else give you any kind of directives or guidance or guidelines?
No.
No, there weren't any.
No guidelines.
All right.
Just teach it.
What did you assume, as you observed, might be some unspoken?
or attitudes for that kind of fact?
Well, the students are supposed to go to class, they're supposed to pass, and supposed to learn.
And they learn to, to such a level they're competent enough to pass the state board.
So that was the most embarrassing thing.
We graduate them, give them a degree, and they flunk the state board.
That was, that's pretty well spoken.
Now, there wasn't any problem at that point about the low, a low pass rate or anything, was there?
No, no, no.
Okay.
We never heard that.
Yeah.
They wanted to be sure that didn't occur.
No, that didn't occur.
No, it was purely up to your control and that time the students wouldn't complain.
They were scared to death of some of our faculty members and I guess I just kind of looked into it because they didn't know where I came from or how I would react if they started complaining, so.
Did you give them any guidelines, you know, your rules?
Except, you know, I had to attend class.
I expect to attend class and pass the quizzes.
That's about all.
I think anybody gave.
And you didn't grade on the curve.
No, no.
Did, were there any, did any student come by to try to influence you or ask for anything special?
I can never remember that, that earlier years, no.
Okay.
Describe these students at that time in the, we'll say in the early 60s,
Describe the veterinary student body in terms of their background, their experience, their professional goals, and so forth.
Most of them were older students at that time compared to nowadays.
I mean, there were a few veterans in class, yeah.
But had they been out of school and done something for a while?
Yeah, a few of them had, yeah, a few of them, yeah.
But overall, they seem to be more mature than now.
Maybe I'm being unfair, but I didn't think about immaturity.
They tend to work better together, more cohesive as a group.
There's always some, you know, some wild ones, I mean, loose cannons.
And they were pretty well, you knew them.
The students kind of talked about them.
We got to know them a little bit good because Dr. Jaggi, before I came here, had two field trips a year we went on.
One was to Fort Worth, Dallas, to packing houses there because most of these students had never been in a slaughterhouse.
So we'd spend three days up there, go up there and go through those.
And the time you could do that for the students, they would, you get to know them fairly well.
You get to know the goof-offs.
You get to know the sincere ones.
Most of them did have a kind of a real background, I would say.
A large majority of them did.
Also, the other trip we had was always a fun trip to go to the King Ranch.
And I miss that one more than anything.
I miss the other one.
Go to King Ranch, and that was always a three day trip.
And Dr. Jaggi, I'd drive.
He never wanted to drive on that, so I'd drive him down there.
And he always had a certain route he'd go.
We always had to stop on the way and see one of the old, his old clinic instructor and we'd always have to stop at Rockdale to duck in, eat fish and we'd always stay at the same place, same hotel in Kingsville and then in the early
mid-sixties I think it was, we had an Australian veterinarian here with us for a year.
So we had to go down a day early.
He was here for a sabbatical and was trying to learn all about our skills.
He was an expert in sheep disease, but he ended up in our department.
And so we went down a little bit early, went down a day early to show him Matamoros, towns down there.
And I'll never forget, we went into the
One of the bars down there, which is what it was.
I can't remember.
Yes Bar, something like that.
I'd be doggone half the vet students were in that bar.
So they always went down a little bit early and once some of them got in trouble and they had to keep them from getting in jail or put in jail.
But anyway, it was kind of interesting running their students in the bar.
But they knew how to have fun, I guess.
Most of these veterinary students are,
Were most of them planting large animal practices or?
Mixed practices probably, most of them mixed practices.
Now there's some small animal, but that particular time, small animal practices have not grown to the extent it has now.
Now it's mostly all small animals, of course, the majority of it.
Were, do you remember any of those first years who were kind of city slickers that really didn't know anything about animals?
Yeah, there was a few in there.
There were a few?
Sure were, yeah, yeah, sure were.
The, for you as a, as a Missourian, did you have any experiences of learning how Texans really operated?
Oh yeah.
Mention some of those.
Well, gosh.
No, of course the language a little bit.
It took me a while to figure out what a bar ditch was.
I kept looking for that bar.
Okay.
And just talking to students as far as some of the terminology is very difficult.
And they like to have fun more than we did as a student I guess you'd say.
We had field trips we took them out on when I started epidemiology.
And we did through the diagnostic lab.
They had a problem case, had, remember we had one, a bunch of calves dying from lead poisoning.
We went out near Columbus and found it was, had drilling going on around there.
We had some, found some pipe dope hiding lead.
These calves were licking.
One time on the way back, they, students had to stop and they, on one of the country roads, we took the shortest route back.
And I thought they were getting out to, to relieve themselves.
And next thing I know, they had about three watermelons in the back.
So we had a watermelon party before we got home.
So things like that, they kind of, they kind of come, get a little bit.
And did, did ever have, did you ever have any experiences about how to pronounce certain Texas towns?
Oh yeah, yeah.
Mahea and Bexar County, it took a while.
The worst one for me still is Elgin.
And because I had one in the first class, I had a fellow named Charlie Graham from Elgin.
And he was very outspoken.
And I talked, oh, you're from Elgin.
No, I'm not from Elgin.
I'm from Elgin.
You know what we're talking about?
I know, it's something I guess like Palestine and Palestine.
Elgin is on the way to Austin, just a little, and the first town this side of Elgin is M-C-D-A-D-E.
and that's MacDade, not McDade, MacDade.
You know, every state has some of those.
They catch me on it in class, you know, if I mention some town and they say, where's that?
That's right down the road here.
They have Kentucky's Versailles.
There you go.
It's Versailles.
Versailles, yeah, yeah.
Did you run into any, and this one I'm asking a blank question, are there any veterinary terms that are uniquely Texan?
There are Haskell and I can't think of them offhand.
I can't think of any, but there are.
Barditch.
Yeah, Barditch.
I've never heard that anywhere else in Barditch.
When did you begin to feel that you were a part of the group?
It took quite a while, really.
I don't know how to put this, but when we came, there's three of us came at the same time.
Arden Kimler, if you remember him, Anatomy, and Charlie Hall for Microbiology.
Actually, he came out a little bit later than we did.
But Arden Kimler and John Ramsey and I all came that same fall.
And we kind of felt like we were kind of lone rangers in a way because everybody else in the factory was an A&M graduate.
Was it literally everybody?
Everybody, yeah.
Is that right?
Yeah, yeah.
In fact, they were in, you know, AVMA has an accreditation program and that year A&M was,
evaluated and they said you're inbreeding too much, all your faculty members need to get so many, you know, in the future, the next three years have to be from outside, no more A&M graduates.
So we were, at fall we came in, all three of us, as a result of, and I think some of them kind of resented that because they thought, well,
Those aren't Aggies.
So he kind of felt that in a way, yeah.
Describe the dean of veterinary medicine at that time.
Your first impression and then take us on through.
First impression of the dean?
Remind me of a very straight-laced Baptist preacher.
Very meticulous, very careful what he said, and what he wrote was very outstanding.
But he was very, very, he knew where you stood.
I was told, you know, you wear a shirt and tie every day, no boots, no beard.
No mustache, clean shaven.
He said those things?
Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
He had to be known and you knew you were going to do that.
Yeah.
Shirt and tie every day.
Coat and tie if you don't need to be.
And no boots.
He was very much against wearing boots or wearing a beard or anything.
What about hours to be here?
Eight, you have eight hours a day at least, yeah, yeah.
You didn't come and go.
You knew you had to be here 8 o'clock.
I mean, that's pretty well steady.
What about Saturdays?
Saturdays?
Nothing about Saturdays, no, no.
Didn't have anything about Saturdays, yeah.
So you all didn't have Saturday classes?
No.
I see.
Over, we did.
Yeah.
Remember Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday.
Yeah, that's kind of a relief because I went out to school in Missouri.
We had Saturday, all Saturday morning we had class.
And Dean Price set the example, though.
Oh, he did.
Definitely.
Yeah, definitely.
Yeah.
Now, was he called Slick Owl already by the time?
Yeah, he was Slick Owl.
Why that?
I think because his hair was combed back slick and he's a pretty smooth tongue, too.
He wasn't devious, but very, very smooth tongue.
Very sharp, really.
Who were some of the other key people when you arrived?
Other key material, John Miller from Anatomy was, and he held kind of a very elevated position because Al Price was in his department and he deserved it.
Of course, Dr. Jaggi was Aggie Jaggi and here I was in that department.
J-A-G-G-E?
J-A-G-G-I, yeah.
J-A-G-G-G-I.
Very fine person, Creed Meany.
Nice.
But he's very, very conservative.
I remember that.
Very set in his ways, the way he did things.
He wasn't about to change his exam methods or his lecturing.
They learned the book.
He read it to them.
Textbook.
Of course, there were some real characters.
Pappy Burns.
in Physiology and Pharmacology.
You say Pappy or Happy?
Pappy.
Pat Burns was the name.
Everybody called him Pappy.
We eventually, a few years later, we started the comprehensive exam after their second year.
And that's when I found out that you, students learned in this class your eyes stayed on your paper because he would pull up, he jerked the paper wave.
He saw their eyes winding around it.
They didn't, didn't even come close to,
Cheating.
One of the real characters, of course, Dick Turk.
You remember him, I'm sure.
Did he have a nickname?
Not that I know of.
I never heard.
I can't remember him.
One story about Dr. Turk, I remember he was very hard of hearing when I came here and, but he could lip read very well and the students found that out.
But unknowing to anybody, they didn't, well, I don't think anybody knew it.
He had some surgical procedures done which he recovered his hearing.
And he didn't tell anybody for three weeks.
I still remember we were walking up the stairways from second to third floor one day, his office on the third floor, and somebody behind me started talking about him.
And I guess he couldn't resist anymore.
He turned around and said, no, that's not true.
And they were dumbfounded.
That's the first time we knew he could hear.
And what was his specialty?
Peristology.
And he's well known throughout the country for it, yeah.
Very good.
All right.
Who else?
Of course, we had the clinic.
Gosh, stop and think.
Had Dr. Romain there.
Gosh, Dr. Callahan.
And he was already Nigg in nickname?
Yeah, already Nigg in nickname, yeah.
Who, before you came here, who did you know by reputation?
My reputation.
Who was there that was best?
Probably Turk, probably knew him.
Dr. Turk?
Yeah, probably knew him best of all.
And what kind of reputation did the A&M?
It had a good reputation for particularly food animal medicine.
Yeah, very good.
I should say, I've heard of Dr. Beamer who was over at Spongebob Clinic.
He's well known, Rusty Beamer.
And he died soon after I came here, not too long after that.
Were there many other young people on the faculty?
Not many, no.
Not many at all.
The, I remember Gene Gowron was fairly young then.
John Huff was over in the, over in the, oh, it was an antiplasmosis lab.
Used to be the old creamery over here before they had a circle over there, that thing.
Describe the veterinary facilities in the early 60s.
Early 60s, they were fairly austere.
I didn't have a desk my first, or have an office my first, that's about the first six months.
They gave me a chair in a laboratory.